[DOCS-4621] Instructions for using OTel API to send ddtrace data (#17518)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/trace_collection/otel_instrumentation/ruby.md

---
title: Custom Instrumentation of Ruby Applications with the OpenTelemetry API
kind: documentation
description: 'Instrument your Ruby application with OTel API to send traces to Datadog.'
code_lang: ruby
type: multi-code-lang
code_lang_weight: 20
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/glossary/'
      tag: 'Documentation'

>       text: 'Explore your services, resources, and traces'

Reviewer: Just noting that we have further reading links in the front matter, but we don't have the Further Reading section at the bottom of the article.

---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation %}}

## Requirements and limitations

> - Datadog Ruby tracing library `dd-trace-rb` version 1.9.0 or greater
> - Gem version support 1.1.0 or greater

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Datadog Ruby tracing library `dd-trace-rb` version 1.9.0 or greater.
- Gem version support 1.1.0 or greater.
```

Reviewer: The suggestions for periods is because I saw that you used them in the Java article. But the others don't use periods, and I could personally go either way.

> The following OTel features are not implemented by the Datadog Trace Provider:

Author: Yeah, let's work on a different framing of this

| Feature                               | Support notes                       |
|---------------------------------------|-------------|-----------------------------|
| [OTel Context propagation][1]         | [Datadog distributed header format][9] is used instead. | 
| [Span processors][2]                  | Unsupported                                          | 
| [Span Exporters][3]                   | Unsupported                                            |
| `OpenTelemetry.logger`                | `OpenTelemetry.logger` is set to the same object as `Datadog.logger`. Configure through [custom logging][10]. |
| Trace/span [ID generators][4]         | ID generation is performed by `ddtrace`.           |

## Configuring OTel to use the Datadog tracing library

> 1. Add your desired manual OTel instrumentation to your Ruby code following the [OTel Ruby Manual Instrumentation documentation][5].
> 1. Add the `ddtrace` gem to your Gemfile:
> 
>     ```ruby
>     source 'https://rubygems.org'
>     gem 'ddtrace'
>     ```
> 
> 1. Install the gem by running `bundle install`.
> 1. Add the following lines to your OpenTelemetry configuration file:
> 
>     ```ruby
>     require 'opentelemetry'
>     require 'datadog/opentelemetry'
>     ```
> 
> 1. Add a configuration block to your application where you can activate integrations and change tracer settings. Without additional configuration here, only code you have instrumented with OTel is traced:

Reviewer 2: We might need to make this change in a few places
```suggestion
1. Add your desired manual OTel instrumentation to your Ruby code following the [OTel Ruby Manual Instrumentation documentation][5].
2. Add the `ddtrace` gem to your Gemfile:

    ```ruby
    source 'https://rubygems.org'
    gem 'ddtrace'
    ```

3. Install the gem by running `bundle install`.
4. Add the following lines to your OpenTelemetry configuration file:

    ```ruby
    require 'opentelemetry'
    require 'datadog/opentelemetry'
    ```

4. Add a configuration block to your application where you can activate integrations and change tracer settings. Without additional configuration here, only code you have instrumented with OTel is traced:
```

Author: Markdown is smart and handles the numbering correctly with all `1.`
